Okay, now, your name is Augustine? Augustine C.
Garcia. Augustine C. Garcia. Yeah, always I say C,
but my whole name is always C. Okay.
Okay.
Okay, we're here on Highway 79 East. Right, east of
Rockdale. What, about one mile east of Rockdale? A
mile and a half, they call it. That's what my car
raced, the speedometer. Okay. Yeah, one and a half
miles. Right, and it's about ten minutes to three
in the afternoon. I guess it is. Okay, all right.
Now, may I call you Augustine? Sure, yeah, sure.
All right. Did you grow up in the United States, or
were you born somewhere else? I was born in Travis
County. Travis County. In Austin, Texas. No
kidding. Right. And how did you get to Rockville?
Well, you know, before up in them days, there was
traveling, you know, working. He was working on
farms. And we moved out here to San Diego, they tell
me, when I was about seven years old. from Bastrop,
San Diego, San Diego, they were just starting the
lignite works around here. And he never did work in
coal, but my grandfather was an old coal miner.
Well, not really a coal miner, he was from Mexico in
them gold mines and silver mines. But that still
was in the ground. And he came here, he went to work
this coal mine, lignite. So he kind of I dragged my
daddy back this way. I see. And that's how we came
here. Do you remember what year you came to
Rockdale? No, I was seven years old. I'm 90. You're
90 today? No, not today. I will be 98 if I live. Oh,
you will. 28th of August, you'll be 98. That's
right. I was born 1887. Okay. The 28th day of
August. All right. And you came to Rockdale when
you were seven years old? Yes, about seven. I don't
know exactly, but I remember when we came here. Do
you remember how old you were before you started
mining yourself? Yes, my father died when I was 15
years old, and I became the head of the family then.
I had to go to work and see two sisters and two
brothers, and I was the oldest one. So you had to go
to work in the mines with your dad? I had to go to work
to make a living for my mother. In those days, the
ladies didn't work like they do today. I see. All
the work was in the kitchen, in the house. And so I
had to get up and ball the jacks to make a living for
five, six hours. My goodness. My mother had to sign
up some kind of a paper so they would let me go to
work. They didn't want me. I wasn't allowed to go 15
years of age. You were too young to work without.
But my mother signed some kind of papers and then
they let me go to work. That's why I lost my leg. You
lost your leg? Yeah, I got artificial leg. I see. I
lost it when I was 18 years old. And you lost it while
you were down in one of the mines? Yes, sir. Right
across back over there. Vogel's mine. Vogel's
mine? Vogel's. I see. I used to be Vogel's over
there. The side of my house is up here, this side of
the railroad, them days. I see. Well, how, if you
can remember, how did the accident occur? My late?
Yes, sir. Well, I was digging coal at that time, and
I walked to the, what they call entrance, you know,
they had a main entrance. Right. And they had rooms
turned off from this entrance where the man was
digging. And I got out of my room and I got on. The
driver wasn't going to take my car. I had a little
coal mine car, you know. We loaded it and then if we
loaded it, they had a man to drive a mule. He'd come
and he'd pull the car from it. And they'd bring you
an empty one. Well, I filled out my car and I dug a big
pile of coal and The driver didn't come, so I
started to go out to the main entrance, see what
happened. And when I did, a big rock fell on me. A big
rock fell on you? Yes, a sand rock. A big sand rock
fell on my back and knocked me down. And I remember
that I had an awful heavy load on me. I was trying to
raise myself, but I couldn't. Then I passed out.
Now they know nothing. They dug me out. They said
when they come and see the pile of dirt and the rock
and there was a pile of dirt on top of it and they see
my shoes, my heels or something. Said somebody's
under here. They start digging and find my legs and
find it. They do it. Said it's Augustine. And they
drove me out. I didn't do it. Because you were still
passed out. Yeah, I was still passed out. And they
drove me out to a place that had more air, I guess.
And then I come into myself, and man, they couldn't
touch me nowhere. I was hurt all over. But I come to
myself, and then they put me in a sheet and brought
me home. Took you to your home? Yes, they brought me
out, put me on a cage that's sort of like an
elevator, you know? Right. And they hushed me out,
and then they took me to my house. We was living, all
the captain was, I bet it was a hundred houses just
outside of Red Road. That was Morgan County.
Uh-huh. It's Morgan. And they brought me home, and
the doctor didn't have the hospital then. Right.
But we had a company doctor. Company doctor.
Company doctor, Dr. Rob Wallace. Rob Wallace?
Yeah, Dr. Rob Wallace. Okay. Used to be three
brothers, Rob, Daddy Wallace. Dr. Bob Wallace, a
little bit of fella. And then Dr. Doug Wallace, and
then Dr. Rob Wallace. Three Wallace's.
And... Did they lay you on a cot in your room? After I
got home? Right. Yes, they laid me on the bed, I
guess. Layed on my bed, on my cot, I guess. And then
the doctors came and they... They put, they didn't
have this stuff that they use now. They had this
little bowl, this plate as they call it. And then
they put those plates on there and held it there for
so many days. And it didn't grow together. So the
doctor said, I was going to lose my leg if it didn't
take it off there. It was turning black or
something. And my mother got scared, you know, and
my older sister. Says, no, well, take your leg off.
I said, no, I'm going to die or let me die. No, they
won't. They wouldn't let me. So they took my leg
off, four and a half inches below my kneecap, right
along here. They took my... The company doctor did
that? Yeah. Even Dr. Bob, I mean, Dr. Dunkwallis,
you see? Four and a half inches from here, my leg is
off right along there. So you, did you have to pay
for the medical attention or did vocal mining have
to pay for it? I had to sue him. Oh, you sued him? I had
to sue him, yeah. They wouldn't come across. They
wanted me to vacate the house. Wanted me and my
mother to get out the house because I wasn't able to
pay the rent. So you took him to court then? So I went
and got me a lawyer. But I did. Well, I got no sense
now, but then as a kid, you know how it is. No
experience or nothing. So that lawyer got me. He
got more than I got. But... The lawyer got more
money than you. Oh, yeah. You know, he sold out
himself. I see now what happened. But I couldn't
see it then. But you did get some money from the
mining company? We got $1,000. $1,000. $1,000 for
my lake. When I owe the commissary the store, I owe
him $700. Man, that was good enough. Let my mother
buy food on credit. Right. And when I got through
with him, I paid him $700. So I had about $300 left.
And I bought my first artificial lake. Them days
didn't cost but $100. Now they cost $400. Yeah.
Well, then, so what did you do after you got the
money, paid him off, got your artificial lady? You
didn't mine again, did you? Well, I went to work to
mine again, but I didn't go down into mine. Oh, I
see. I got the job. I got to learn how to fire, you
know, as a fireman, fire boilers. Fire the
boilers. Yes. Right. And they're pumping water
out of the mine, so they had to have a man all night
long to keep steam up. for the pumps to run. And I got
a job firing boilers. I see. What kind of fuel did
you use? Lignite. You used the lignite. Lignite,
yeah. And how long did you have that job? Oh, I
guess, I don't know, for nearly a year, I guess, a
month. Then I began to learn how to run engine. Then
from there, from Wichita, we had to leave Mobile
because they made us get out the house. So we went to
Wichita. And my mother-in-law, the only thing she
could make out is run a boarded house. She kept
boarding people, you know, single men. Oh, she
boarded people? Yeah, she boarded people. I see.
And that's how I got straight up. Then we moved to
Texas. Texas Coal Company mine over here. Oh, you
did? Uh-huh. And then I went to run the engine,
Houston engine. I was big shot then. Oh. Yeah, I
could run a Houston engine. So you didn't go down
beneath the ground anymore? Yes, I went, but not
deep coal no more. I went as a pump man, they called
it, you know. Oh, I see. As a pump man. And then for a
while, I was a foreman. A foreman? Foreman, yeah, I
was a boss. pit boss, they call it. For a while, not a
long time, but for a while. When you were running
the hoist, let's start back when you were stoking
the boiler, how were you paid? I was paid by the
month. By the month, okay. And then when you became
an engineer, by the month. And then when you were a
foreman, by the month. Do you remember how much you
were paid per month? Let's see, I was getting, I
don't remember what, we worked 12 hours. I went to
work six in the morning to six at night, at evening.
And, uh, I don't remember how much I got when I was
fine, but when I rode the engine, I got $90 a month.
$90 a month for being an engineer. For engineer,
yeah. That was 12 hours a day. Five days a week? Six
days a week. Six days a week. What about when you
were a foreman? Same thing. $90 a month? $90, yeah,
the same. I didn't stay long as a foreman. Mr.
Taylor, Sam Taylor was a foreman. And he had to go to
Houston, bought something, and he left it in his
place for about a month or so. I didn't stay long.
Then he quit, and they put this woman there, the
Texas Gold Company, that was Mr. E.B. Phillips.
E.B. Phillips, right. And Mr. St. Kitts,
Shrivlin, Mr. Shrivlin. Shrivlin? Shrivlin was
the superintendent. And the storekeeper. And
E.B. Phillips and H.C. Meyer was there. The big,
there was a big shot. There was only place there or
something. Do you remember what kind of a man E.B.
Phillips was? He was a big-style fellow, and he
talked and cussed like dickens. Every time he
moved his mouth, he'd cuss. He'd cuss over the
phone and everywhere, every time. I remember one
time when I was buying the boilers, it was the
wintertime, and they had a haul of water, and they
had a digger on a wagon with some burners, you know.
And he got, it was so cold, he didn't want to go after
more water. So I was getting out of water, and I
called Mr. Phillips, I said, Mr. Phillip, I said,
with my guy, why did the ass run over that goddamn
nigga? I said, well, it's too cold. He don't want to
get out. I'll be there in a minute. I'll make the
setup. He's going to wake up. His mouth will move.
Over the phone, he cussed. He didn't care. He was
that kind of man. He was a good-hearted man, all
right. Good-hearted? Yeah, Mr. Phillip was a good
man. Yes, sir. How long did you work for the Texas
Colt Company? Oh, I don't know. I worked out many
years. I would look at the letter that I got from
them, you know. They give me when I quit. They give
me a big letter, recommendation, you know. I don't
want to work on them. For them, that I was a
dependable man and all this and that. I got a letter
that's somewhere. Yeah, I'd like to see that later
on, maybe, if we could. Well, my wife, she can't
hardly get up now. She's in bed. Well, if we can't
find it, that's all right. But from what I know, the
Texas Coal Company mine started to really phase
out about the mid-20s, mid-late 20s. Yes. Is that
right? During the war. Or after the war? And after
the war, yeah. They closed up. Why did they close
up? I don't know. Oh, I think Alcoa put them out of
business. Well, Alcoa didn't come in until...
1950. So I was just wondering if maybe the
Depression didn't hurt
coal companies. Do you remember what you did
during the Depression? Sure. I was already moved
here. I was already had quit. You know, after I quit
Texas Coal Company, I bought me an automobile that
went to run ginning. I run ginning for about a year
and a half, for two years. You ran a gin? A ginning? a
service car for about a year and a half. I see. Were
you able to save money working at the Texas Gold
Company? Not too much, but I saved something. Yes,
I saved something. I married in 1919.
And I had a little money when I married. Had been
saving, you know, holding back. Then after I
married, I bought me a car. In 1919, I married in
1920, I think. This girl was married to my oldest
daughter. She was born in 1920. And that was a brand
new Ford. Model T or Model A? Model T. Model T. Model
T. They had no Model As yet. They came in a little
late afterwards. It was Model T. It had courage on
its side. No, no, no glasses, nothing like that. I
see. No, I had curtains. Curtains? Yeah, and a
cloth top. You know, you could put it back or raise
it up any way you wanted. So you didn't go back to the
mines after you quit? No, after I quit, I didn't go
back. I moved here. Then I bought this little place
of land here, an old house that used to be out there,
right there close to where the fence is now. And
then I went to work for the city. City Water Works.
At Rockdale. At Rockdale, yeah. That work that I
doing, worked for the city about two, three years.
Then I quit the city and I went to plumbing by
myself, you know, my own job. I was a plumber. A
plumber. Plumber until I retired. Well, that
sounds great. If we could go back, you know, to your
days at the Texas Coal Company, okay, could you
describe a typical day at the mine you know what
time did you get up in the morning what did you do
well my job was i had to get up i i didn't get up in the
morning i went to work and i was working at night you
see okay 12 hours i went to work at six in the in the
evening and and quit six in the morning i see then mr
mr uh summers the old man he come in and take the day
They called it shifts. I was working that shift and
he was working this shift. They said I was young and
he was old, man. They let him work. I told him,
that's all right. I could stand the 12 hours of
work. And I did for years and I don't know how long.
What did you do during your 12-hour shift? Fired
boilers, keeping the steam up and watching my
pumps. They were on 12 hours all night, keep that
water on. He pumped the water out of the mine. See,
they had a flood here one time. The water broke in
the mine and yellow fell up to the top. And they had
to pump water day and night there for a long time.
Several weeks or? Months. Months? Yes, yes.
Months. And you lived right next to the mines,
right? Oh, we lived at the camps, you see. The camp
had houses. Oh, I had rows of houses, one here, one
there, and just, you know, about every 40 feet, one
from the other. Two-room house. Two-room house.
Yes, one room and a kitchen, little old kitchen,
yes. About as big as my garage size. How many people
would live in these? Well, some of them had just a
man and a wife, and some of them had two or three
children, or some of them had four or five kids, and
they all lived in that one room. Yeah. See, when I
first married, my mother was running a boarding
house. She had a big four-room house. That's a
boarded house. A boarding house. Yeah, and four
rooms. One room, she kept that for the dining room
for there. When the men come to eat, that big room,
and three rooms for my sister, she stayed. And
after I was married, when I move out, then I went and
rent one of those small houses just Me and my wife,
you know. Right. Do you know, do you remember how
much the company charged you to live in those
houses? Yes, the small house was $3 a month. $3 a
month. And that big house where my mother lived was
$6 a month. I see. Yeah. Well, did your mother's
boarding house belong to the mine? Yeah, to the
company. I see. To the company, yes. What kind of
men would come and board there? Well, working men,
working, working in the mine, coal diggers. Oh.
Would it be bachelors most of them? Yeah,
bachelors, sure. Bachelors. They had no wives.
They're bachelors. They're single men, they call
it. Single men. Single men. Yeah, mother had this
room, this six, I mean, this whole room of house.
It's a boarded house. Then they covered it with
rent. It's a mortar house. They had carts for them.
Single men sleep, you know. That's $3 a month. But
mother didn't have to pay for that. Each one of
them. Mrs. Trevlin, he took charge of that. He
charged everyone, I don't know how much, but
mother didn't have to do with that. All she had to do
was to make a four-room house. She had to pay rent
for that. And then, did the men pay her for cooking?
Oh, yes. She charged them for that. I believe it was
$3 a week. Three hours a week? Yeah, for cooking.
And the grub, not only cooking, but the groceries
and everything. Yes, served the table. All that
dude sat on the table and ate. She served them three
meals a day? Three meals a day. Yes, sir. Did they
come up out of the mines for lunch? They usually
take lunch at dinner time. Very seldom. Very few of
them come out at noon. They go down in the morning.
didn't come out about started coming out from
three to four o'clock well did your mother fix them
a supper to take down into the mind at dinner yes
that's bigger lunch she fixed the lunch for them so
for instance if i say well i'm not coming to dinner
today fix me a lunch please all right mother fixing
my life and i take my lunch with me so i wouldn't be
she wouldn't expect me to be there at noon Because I
already took my lunch, you see. Well, if the miners
came out between 3 and 4, what did they do after they
finished the day of mining? They just sat around
and talked. Sit around and talked. Yeah. What did
they do on the weekends? Same thing. Same thing?
Same thing. They had a big wash, a bathroom place
there. right close to the agent house, concrete
floor. They were there going to shoot dice, most of
them. They spent time shooting dice, playing
poker or some kind of game. But they spent Sundays
and Saturday nights over there. I see. In the camp.
Would they ever go into Rockville? Oh, yes, they'd
go on Saturday evenings and buy their beer and
bring it back, or maybe they'd get drunk and down.
Some of them would drink one in the morning. Mr.
Stribble had to go and pay the fines to get them out.
They had to come and work it, pay the fine. Was that
fine taken out of their paycheck? Oh, sure. Yeah,
sure. They had to pay it all. Of course, Mr.
Stribble would give them time to say, For
instance, if a man had just $15 coming through the
week, and the flight was $20 or $50, he'd take out,
say, maybe $5 this payday. Next payday, he'd take
another $5. Then he'd pay his pay. Yeah, he'd give
him a chance. He'd give him a break. Yeah, the other
street was pretty nice. Was there any type of
musical instruments around the camps at all? No.
No, every now and then, maybe once, maybe some,
maybe one or two of us used to play horns or violin or
something. They had dances all right. They did?
Yeah, they had dances about every two, three
Saturday nights. Was that in the camp? In the camp.
They had a big hall over there. Company made up a big
hall. I see. Was that over at the Vogel Mine? That
was at Texas Mine. They had a dance hall? They had a
dance hall at Texas Mine.
Do you remember where most of the
miners came from? Oh, they came from all over the
country, I think. They used to send a man to Laredo
to get some hands, to get some coal diggers. They'd
bring a bunch of people over there. Sometimes
eight or 10, sometimes three or four, just that
way. Some of them were families, lots of them were
single, but they'd bring them in. They'd send the
men, they were down there, to Laredo, or
Salentown, or somewhere, to get some men. Were
they, had they already been miners in Mexico, or
were they new to New Mexico? No, some of them maybe,
there was some of them. They'd never seen a mine
before, I don't reckon. But they claimed they was a
miner.
Did they think that the conditions here were
better than in New Mexico? I guess so, they liked
it. They liked it here? They liked it here in the
United States, yeah. They still like it because I
see lots of them white bikes coming this way. They
still like it. You're a natural citizen because
you were born here. Oh, I was born here, raised
here, this side of Austin. Yeah, all my life. Yeah,
I was born in Austin, Texas, Travis County. First
of my life, the week before last. I look at the
captain and I says, I wonder what was that boy,
somebody lose check again? So far.
That's a long time ago. Long time ago. Did,
Augustine, do you remember any labor problems at
the Texas Coal Company mine? Were there any
strikes or any union movements or anything? No,
there ain't no union. No, they had no strikes.
Well, what if one of the workers got mad at Mr.
Phillips or something? Did he just quit and leave,
or what did he do? Well, if they get mad, they just
quit that mine and go find a job at the other one. You
see, there was a world of mine, and here was a
Vogel's right across there, and that was a Texas,
and that was a big lump far on yonder. There was
four, five shafts. There was hundreds and
hundreds of coal diggers. So if I did mess with my
boss here or something, I just quit, go with the
other place, get me a job, and go to work. And maybe
one for over there, come over here, just that way. I
see. Well, did you work all year long? Huh? Did you
work all the year? Yes, sure, all year long. Yeah,
we had no vacation then. No vacation. No, sir. You
know what vacation was? No retirement plan, no.
When you got too old and you couldn't do the job,
it's just like an old mule that turns you loose in
the pasture. Gone. You can't do no more good while
it's gone. It ain't like now. No, I lost the best
part of my life. I wish I had the more, but 40 years
later than I was born. Why is that? Because it's
different now. Whole lot of different than it was
when I was a young man. See, when I was a young man, I
go to work at 6 in the morning. If I'm one hour late,
they send me home and they wouldn't let me work. And
if I quit one hour earlier, they took it off my
check. If you wait three hours, you get paid for
three hours, rain or shine, whether you had the
reason or not. You wait three hours, six days,
that's all you get paid for. But nowadays, you
start to work, you get full time. And after you get
so old, that you're 65 years old, you get Social
Security, you get retirement from the railroad,
all that protection. Well, back yonder when I was a
young man, was nothing like that. When I got a lot of
good work, they just kicked my butt and gone.
Kicked me out. Said, you're putting out a young man
in this place. That's the way the combine used to
be. Well, did anybody take care of you then?
Families or friends? Nobody, nobody. You just
kicked it out on your own? If you had it, you eat it.
If you didn't have it, you wouldn't eat it. You'd
starve. No, it ain't like it is now, not there. No,
no. No, back in them days, if you had a piece of
bread, you'd eat it. If you didn't have it, what?
You just didn't have it? No, it was over. What
happened when somebody got sick? Did the other
families help out? Yes, we got to take up
collections. We'd go around and say, so-and-so's
at a badge. How much can you have? Well, a quarter
maybe, half a dollar, or whatever you could. And we
take a list to the store, to Mr. Stribling, and give
it to him. He says, for instance, I'll go half a
dollar, all right, Augustine? He says, you go half
a dollar, so-and-so half a dollar, and on and on. We
give Mr. Stribling the list, and he take it all
right. So that made his wife, or his daughter, to
come to the store and buy it. If you had $4 worth,
well, you'd get $4 worth of grub. That's why we take
up collections, you know, to help them. Somebody
die, we take up a collection to pay for the coffin.
Yeah, you see, while we was in the mine, someone
with a book, piece of paper, the person, oh,
somebody passed away. So and so died last night.
How much can you put on here to help? Oh, maybe a
dollar or a dollar and a half, something like that.
Whatever you could, $2. Well, okay. They bring the
list to Mr. Smith's store. Okay. He said, sit down,
says, let's have a coffee for so much. They got $20
collected here or $30, $40 or $50, whatever you
want. Let them have it. We got nothing to worry
about. That's the way it is. But some men got killed
at the mine. They wouldn't give them a penny, not
even a coffin.